>> Warning this film contains
images of Aboriginal people
and may contain the names and
images of Aboriginal people now
deceased.
This film also contains images
of traditional Aboriginal
women's ceremonies.
[DRUMROLL]
[APPLAUSE]
[BEEPING]
[GARBLED ELECTRONIC SOUNDS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (CHANTING) We want papers.
We want papers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What most people don't
understand is that having
a baby in Australia, choosing
care that is not mainstream
that the majority of women are
forced into is a very political
thing.
>> Right now today, women that
use a special substitution
or a general practitioner have
funding and have indemnity
insurance protection.
And women who choose
home birth don't.
>> That is absolutely
inequitable.
And we are going to change that.
>> National Health's position
on home birth is that it's best
avoided.
>> The only issue at the
front of my organization is
the safety of women
and their babies.
>> (CHANTING) Our bodies,
our babies, our choice.
>> Home birth is a safe choice.
And in the current
climate of maternity care,
home birth is the safe choice.
[CHEERING]
>> We are her to take it
through to the election.
We have a deputy prime
minister who's a woman.
We have a health minister who
is a woman with a young child.
They've got to start listening.
Here we are.
[CHEERING AND APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> From politicians and
from the medical profession,
if what they're worried
about is self-preservation,
my interests as woman giving
birth can't possibly come first
in that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Do you know where
guys were born?
>> I was born there.
>> No.
>> Not exactly.
You were born right
where that cup of tea is.
>> I felt so powerful.
And I think that
that's something
that stays with you for
the rest of your life.
>> If giving birth to Olivia
was the most empowering moment
of my life, giving birth to
Matilda was the most joyous
moment of my life.
>> We are [INAUDIBLE].
We are holy women when
we are giving birth.
>> It's the most miraculous
thing I have ever done.
>> It was just so special,
so special and the greatest
experience of my
life, both of them.
And you never forget it, ever.
>> Women who have had birth
experiences that they're proud
of and they feel have fulfilled
what they had hoped say to me
that often they feel
silenced about talking about
their strong birth experiences
because they feel somehow
or other that other
women feel judged by it.
And so if even the women who
are having these strong and very
positive birth experiences
are not speaking about them,
then there's sort
of a vacuum in which
the negative and the
fearful stories about birth
are ever-growing.
>> My name's Noni Hazlehurst.
I've had two home births,
Charlie and William.
The first one was when I was
35, and the second one when
I was 40.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The reason I chose
home births was
because I had heard
so many horror
stories about people's
intervention in their births
in hospitals.
I did a lot of reading.
And I came to the
conclusion for myself
that I didn't want to take the
risk, the risks that seemed
to go with going to hospital.
And I also didn't want to have
everybody go home at the end
and leave me there.
I wanted the creation
of the family
to start right there and then.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you're a low-risk
woman, healthy pregnancy,
you walk into the doors
of our institutions,
what you do is you embark on
a cascade that often takes you
in a direction you
never anticipated.
You arrive.
Midwife put you on a bed.
She puts a monitor
on your belly.
She examines you.
She takes your blood pressure.
She finds something
going on in the monitor.
There's a deviation
on the trace.
The monitor never comes off.
Now you're really uncomfortable
because you're on the bed.
You need pain relief.
You're going to
have an epidural.
Now you're going to need a drip.
Now you're going
to need a catheter.
Now you're never ever going
to get off that monitor.
OK, we progress.
Your labor slows down.
Now you need oxytocin.
Now you get to second stage.
Guess what, you can't push
because you can't feel.
So now we get the forceps out.
Now we cut the episiotomy.
Suddenly you've got
a baby in your arms.
Yes, you're alive,
and the baby's alive.
But has that been
a good experience?
And did it need to
happen that way?
>> A lot of my friends
were alarmed at my choice.
But they were, coincidentally
or not coincidentally,
the same people who offered
horrific hospital stories.
So I think people just
feel frightened in general
of what could go wrong.
But I just felt the
proximity to a hospital
was all the insurance I needed.
>> People will always say, well,
what if anything happened when
you're at home.
The thing is, when you're
looking after a woman who
you know, a pregnancy that
you're very familiar with,
and with the woman,
you're not leaving
her to look after the
woman in the next room,
you're practicing very safely.
>> At home, because there's
nothing else interrupting,
there's nothing
else interfering--
you haven't got synthetic
hormones going on.
You have got an induce labor.
You have got an
epiduralized woman.
What you see is
birth flowing along
in an incredibly natural way.
The moment something goes
wrong or starts to deviate,
it's so obvious that
often what happens
is it's the tiny
ripple in the water
you can see so clearly
because everything's so calm
and in process that you
actually step in at that point
and you transfer.
So before you end
up with a tsunami,
you've gone in already because
you've seen the ripple.
>> A very close friend of mine
had had a home birth probably
15 years before I considered it.
And it was an amazing
experience for her.
Her mother was with her.
And she ended up being my
birth person, support person,
Mary Moody, the writer.
And Mary wasn't any better
equipped than I was.
She was a woman like me with
strengths and weaknesses.
And I just felt
completely capable
of doing what she'd done.
>> For whatever
reason in our society,
the safer the
childbirth becomes,
there is almost hand in hand
an exaggerated fear of things
going wrong.
>> Everybody says
the same thing.
Oh, my god.
You had a home birth.
You're so brave.
>> I don't think I can do it.
>> Never.
>> No I never went, no.
>> I personally
wouldn't risk my baby.
>> Not to detract from
the women's right,
there's a second person
involved in childbirth.
Now, the baby has, I think,
the right to safety and care
but is not able to
voice those rights
and doesn't have any part in
the decision making process.
So I think advocacy for the
yet or soon to be born child
is very, very important.
>> There's this heightened
sensitivity about things going
wrong.
And it colors the entire
way that, particularly,
some obstetricians and
midwives view their work.
So that it all
becomes an exercise
in avoiding complications
and risks and no attention
to the positive
side of the work.
>> I just wasn't frightened.
But there were people who were.
My mother was not,
because she was English.
And it was normal in England
when she was a young woman
to have birth at home.
So although lots
of things I did,
my mother didn't
approve of, having
a home birth was
something-- and she
was a very frightened person.
But it was entirely
normal for her.
So that really pointed
out the difference
between England
and Australia to me
because I expected her
to be, oh, don't do it.
But she was, oh, that's lovely.
>> The whole approach in the
NHS is that you choose between
a home birth, a birthing
center, or a hospital.
It's in the big book you get.
It's what midwives say,
wherever you want, your GP says.
And you go online.
And you can look up any
hospital on the NHS system.
They all have
their own websites.
And it will give you their rates
for how many women have home
births and how many
transfer or not and Caesar
rates and natural birth rates.
And you can look
and go, oh, wow,
this hospital has a really,
really high Caesar rate.
Lots of people end
up having cesareans.
I don't know about that.
This one looks better.
Well, I tried to find this
stuff out in Australia.
And it was like I was kind of
being asked for secret files.
And how dare I ask
things like that?
And they're not statistics
that would be available to you.
>> The policy in the
UK is very progressive.
Women have a choice
about where they
give birth, who'll look after
them, and the kind of birth
that they want.
>> This is an unusual
maternity service,
because we have about 5 and
1/2 thousand deliveries,
of which about
2,000, slightly less,
take place either at home
or in midwife-led units,
which most people in the
developed world would think was
either impossible or mad.
>> With home births,
it's just the gentleness.
It's the whole ambience.
You get the low lights.
You can have the candles.
They can eat and
drink when they want.
They can go to their own toilet.
They're with their family.
That is a lot when
you're in labor.
And you can have
the children there
if you want to have the children
there, the family members.
It's like a ritual.
>> The ball is very firmly
in the woman's court.
It's her home.
It's her domain.
>> She calls the shots.
>> And you have to always
remember that you're a guest
in that home.
And so if she wants to
stop at 10 centimeters
and start cooking beans on
toast, then you have to say,
that's fine, as
long as I can listen
in to the baby for five minutes.
You carry on.
You obviously feel you
need beans on toast.
>> I may even go
put the coffee on.
>> It's very much their game.
And obviously, there are things
you have to do for safety.
But apart from that, there's
just very little-- everything's
very, very fluid.
>> Why would you not encourage
women to try and do the most
natural, beneficial thing
for them and their baby?
Why would you not
encourage them?
It's bizarre to me.
Why would you ignore
the statistics
from all the countries
where it is a natural thing
and it does happen?
Why would you say
that can't be right,
and it doesn't apply to
Australian women or women
living in this country?
What are we so afraid of?
I don't get it.
>> We've had a very large
home birth study from
the Netherlands, over 500,000
women giving birth there,
low-risk women with midwives.
No difference in
perinatal mortality
to giving birth in hospital.
We've had the US study showing
over 5,000 births at home,
low-risk.
No difference in
perinatal outcome,
far better outcomes
for mom and baby.
But we've also had
some studies coming out
where they've mixed the risk.
So we've had a study coming
out of the UK, which had
twins and breaches included.
We've had a study coming out
from South Australia that again
had high risk-women involved.
Again, when you remove the
high-risk women and only
looked at the low-risk,
no difference.
Add the high risk, yes,
there is increased risk.
This isn't rocket science.
It makes total sense.
If there are added
risks, then home
is not often the best
place to be physically.
But some women may
feel mentally it is.
And then we come to the
third part of the debate.
Do women have the
right to make a choice?
>> The definitive study where
you enroll a group of women
in home birth and a group
of women in hospital birth
and look at it,
it won't be done.
There'll always be biases.
That study won't be done.
So they have to be
done retrospectively,
where you look back at births
and the data surrounding it
and look at those figures.
And yes, each interest
group will obviously
be able to cite papers
and studies which support
their particular argument.
>> Having worked both in
the UK and in Australia,
one of the challenges in
Australia is that looking after
healthy pregnancies is the bread
and butter for a large section
of the obstetric workforce.
And it's difficult
to relinquish that.
It's not something you
can give up overnight.
It's a massive
industrial change.
That doesn't exist in the
UK under the National Health
Service, where
obstetricians actually want
to look after
complex pregnancies
and complicated
births only and are
very happy to leave the
normal healthy pregnancies
to midwives or to GPs.
And I think that's healthy.
And if we were honest,
if we stood back from it,
that's probably in the
interests of women.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Childbirth in the public
system or in the hospital
system, it's not
public hospitals--
it's in the system--
is like having sex
in public because it
is an intimate moment shared
with a perfect stranger.
Every single person,
even women that
pay many thousands of dollars
to have a private obstetrician,
will still share that
moment with someone
they've never met before.
>> The research all shows
that continuity of carer,
one-to-one care, is really
strongly associated with better
outcomes.
Everybody knows this.
And there's hard
research to prove it.
But the system really doesn't
necessarily reflect that.
They don't make that a priority.
>> Of course, it's not
just about continuity,
because you can't continuity
of care from a medical
professional.
And they will take a
very medical attitude
and still very much see you as
a belly, a baby, blood pressure,
et cetera.
Continuity care from a midwifery
perspective is a social model.
And that involves how are
you going as a person.
It involves listening
a lot, talking a lot.
It involves empowering women.
Of course, you can do this.
Your body is
designed to do this.
It involves women
actually helping women
to believe in themselves.
>> With both births, I didn't
do much visiting of doctors.
I went to a doctor for
confirmation of the pregnancy
and expressed my desire
to have a home birth
and sought out my midwife,
Maggie Leckie Thompson.
And I saw her monthly and then
weekly in the last few weeks.
And I felt so loved and
embraced and empowered by her.
She filled me with confidence.
She was absolutely a realist.
But she just made me
feel completely capable.
>> The midwifery care that I
received and that I've been
a passionate advocate for is
about empowering that woman,
educating and supporting that
woman for that transformative
event, to actually enter
motherhood as a strong,
confident, supported woman, and
then to create that new family.
>> It's fantastic to support
her and watch how that supports
empowers her to do what is
probably the most fantastic
thing she'll ever do,
to birth her baby.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I remember Maggie
the midwife saying,
when the baby comes out,
nobody tell her what it is.
Let her find out for herself.
I just remember this
extraordinary feeling
of my pelvis opening.
It was the most amazing
thing I've ever experienced.
And I was sorry it didn't
happen the second time.
It just kind of popped
out the second time.
But this feeling
of your whole self
just expanding and
expanding and expanding
to let this person out.
And then the minute
his head was out,
it was January in the
Blue Mountains, summer.
This amazing mist descended
all around the house.
And about 150,000
butterflies, white butterflies
came to the windows.
And there was an
almighty clap of thunder.
And there were eight witnesses.
It wasn't just me going nuts.
So loud that she was saying,
don't push, don't push,
don't push because she
was checking the cord.
And I couldn't hear her.
Anyway, he came out.
And I just looked.
I couldn't do anything.
I just looked at him.
And she said, aren't you
going to pick him up?
Oh, and I said, is it a boy?
And she said, yes,
it's a boy, damn it.
Sorry I told you.
Anyway, I picked him up, put
him straight on the breast.
I was desperate for a
coffee for some reason.
And the house, for three
days with both births,
the house felt like there
were angels around it.
The atmosphere in the
house was just beautiful.
It just felt blessed is the
only way I can describe it
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I am Sheila Kitzinger.
I'm a social
anthropologist of birth.
There aren't many of us around.
I study women's experiences
in different cultures all
around the world and
how they're treated
and how the medical system works
and how women feel about birth
and how it affects their lives.
The intervention that started
when doctors took over
from midwives--
and that really was
beginning way back
in the last century for
women who were middle class
and could afford to
pay for a doctor.
I think that this
has meant that birth
has been seen as
an ordeal rather
than a challenge and a joy.
>> The most precious thing is
at stake here, new human life.
There is nothing more
important than new human life.
And so understandably,
lots of people
involved in maternity
care, whether it's midwives
or doctors or anesthetists,
obstetricians,
want to make it as
safe as possible.
And many people think
that to do that, you
need to be in hospital.
And we don't agree actually.
I think what we want is
for women to have choice,
that they understand
that sometimes
unexpected things happen.
And for those very,
very rare events,
it may well be that they
would have been better
in hospital rather than at home.
But they are
extremely rare events.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since I was very small, I
always wanted to be a rural
general practitioner.
People in the country
are very self-sufficient.
And they like to be able
to look after themselves.
And helping people to do that,
helping them to stay at home,
stay well, and stay
out of hospital
is something that
I really like to do
and something that I'm
very passionate about.
My eldest daughter's
name is Matilda.
She's just started
school in Mallacoota,
in prep, which she
absolutely loves.
And I have a little
boy, Hugo, who's two.
He's just gorgeous.
As a doctor, I guess I'm
used to assessing risk.
And I'm used to making
important decisions.
Especially working in
remote general practice,
you have to be able to
balance risk very carefully.
And so I guess for me that
I was comfortable being
able to look at all the risks
that were being presented to me
and assess them myself.
But I found talking
to the obstetric team,
there was this expectation that
you didn't make any decisions
yourself in your obstetric
care, that you took advice.
And that if you didn't take
that advice, your baby may die.
And that advice isn't
always consistent
between obstetricians.
And it isn't always based
on best medical evidence.
>> If we truly use evidence,
everything would be the same
everywhere.
But we don't use evidence.
We just say
evidence-based practice.
And then we use culturally-based
practices everywhere.
>> During my first
pregnancy with Matilda,
I felt very
comfortable, very happy.
I really enjoyed being pregnant.
And I was looking
forward to, because I
was a fit and healthy young
woman, having an actual birth.
When I was diagnosed
with preeclampsia
when Matilda was due to
be born, my obstetrician
called me to let
me know that I'd
had some abnormal tests
after my blood pressure had
been noted to be high.
And said that I needed to
come in for an induction.
And at that time, I felt
absolutely shattered.
I really cried.
And I grieved for what I
knew I was going to lose,
my ability to, I guess, bring
my baby into the world naturally
and do something that I knew
my body was capable of doing.
Once you step into
the hospital system,
you take off your clothes.
And you're given a gown.
And at that point, I
really felt like I'd
handed over my decision
making to the people who
were looking after me.
I trusted them to, I guess,
make the right decisions for me
and also to give me the
right information as well.
So when the obstetric
registrar said
that he'd seen some fetal
distress on the CTG monitor,
I immediately agreed
to having a Cesarean.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Afterwards, I actually found
out that the CTG was actually
normal, and there wasn't
any fetal distress.
So obviously, that's
kind of colored my view
of how obstetric care is given.
>> We have four decades of
evidence that show us that
being on the monitor does not
improve outcomes in any way.
All it does is raise
the Cesarean rate.
Why does it do that?
Because if you see
every deceleration,
you start to freak out.
And then you go, oh, my god.
The baby's in distress.
And you rush off for a
Cesarean that wasn't necessary.
And you deliver by an
unnecessary Cesarean
a baby with an Apgar of 10,
because the baby was fine
all along.
>> The real problem is when
people take a supposedly
troubling sign on any form
of evaluation and believe it
uncritically, because that's
where you end up with massive
levels of intervention.
>> The rate of Cesarean
section in Australia today is
absolutely appalling.
It's shameful.
And it's rising.
And unless we do
something differently,
who knows where it's
going to end up.
>> The emphasis is that we
should be reducing the Cesarean
section rate because once the
Cesarean section rate is above
15%, the best international
studies show that it
doesn't actually confer a
benefit to mothers and babies.
>> The Cesarean section rate
for the WHO is a 1985 figure,
which is some 30 years ago.
The factors that have
probably contributed
to the increase in
Cesarean section rate
are some of those
factors that are changing
in the demographics
of our population,
older mothers at
age of first baby
and more obesity, larger
mothers, diabetes,
and various medical
complications
which go with that
older mothers group.
>> We actually did
the research on that.
And what we found
was that women who
had paid through the nose
for this expensive care
with a private obstetrician
in a private hospital
were having more than double
the rates of intervention.
What was silent in that
research was the admission
of babies to neonatal unit.
Because of the intervention,
because of the induction,
because of the
augmentation, because
of all of the fiddling
around with their labor
and their being in hospitals
where they can't labor well,
these women are having Cesarean
sections or instrumental
births.
And their babies
are flat at birth.
And they're going to
the neonatal unit.
Now, no one told them that
that was a possibility.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We fool ourselves to think
just because we can do these
amazingly amazing
things with technology--
so we can make eyesight better.
We can get in there and
tinker with the heart.
We can not make a better
uterus or better vagina
than women come equipped with.
Thank you very much.
>> People who claim that
Cesarean section for everybody
is the future, they don't take
into account what we learn
at the present about the
development of the capacity
to love.
They don't take into account
that the hormones released
to have a baby are
hormones of love.
So they just ignore
many scientific advance.
They are only aware
of technical advances
but not about
scientific advances,
a great diversity of
scientific advances
that oblige us to
think long-term.
>> We are now just opening
the doors in research
to the ongoing implications
or the aftermath of Cesarean
section, the rise in diabetes
in children born by Cesarean
section, the rise in
asthma, the rise in cancer,
the rise in
behavioral disorders.
We are just starting
to actually glimpse
how we are changing
the face of society.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Recovering from a
Cesarean section is the same
as recovering from
major abdominal surgery,
when you're used to being fit
and active and healthy to not
being able to do your
normal activities,
not being able to just walk
up the stairs or drive a car,
something that I wasn't
prepared for at all.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think women somehow feel
that it's shameful to have
a Cesarean, that
maybe it's a cop out,
that maybe they're less of a
woman for having a Cesarean,
that they're taking the easy
route or that they're taking
the vain route or that
they're too posh to push.
And I just think that's such
an outdated, insulting way
to look at a legitimate
way to give birth.
And I know that some women
have thought that about me.
And it just makes
me angry, because I
chose to have two cesareans.
I've got two divine children.
And I had two empowering,
positive, great births
where I was in charge.
I mightn't have been
doing the procedure,
but I was an equal
partner in the process.
And I was having a say.
And it was my say.
And it was my decision.
And that's what I chose.
And that's what I paid for.
And that's what I got.
>> The contrast between me and
having my babies and getting up
afterwards and giving the baby
to Peter or to the big sister
and going and having a shower
and just having all my friends
around and having a beautiful
sort of celebration together
and seeing my friend Jane
maybe like two days after,
totally drugged to the
eyeballs on painkillers.
Her partner had already
had to go back to work.
The baby was in the
special care ward,
which is on another
floor of the hospital,
not even in the same--
And then she couldn't
physically get herself
into the wheelchair
to go and see her baby
in the special care ward.
It was just absolutely horrific.
I don't think
people actually see.
The same thing, science
is just such a be all end.
But they don't really see just
what it does to your body.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For me, it was very important
to attempt a vaginal birth with
my second pregnancy but also
for that to be successful.
When you've had a Cesarean, you
can't really be safely induced.
The risk of uterine
rupture increases
with induction, which
means that if I'm
going to have an
actual delivery,
I need to go into
labor naturally
when the baby is
ready to be born.
Because of my
gestational diabetes,
I'm getting information
from obstetricians
saying that I should be
having my baby somewhere
between 37 weeks and 40 weeks.
Although there's not really--
there was no consensus
amongst the obstetricians
from this hospital.
The three different
obstetricians
I saw all gave me
different dates.
At one of my ultrasounds
that was attended
by another obstetrician,
she actually
did mention at some point
maybe we could just give you
a bit of Syntocinon,
which is a medication
to augment or bring on labor
as well, to get you going.
And I've got alarm
bells in my head
saying, that's dangerous, no.
I know that I'm never
going to have Syntocinon.
That's going to
increase my chances
of having uterine rupture.
At that same time, we attended
a talk about vaginal birth
after Cesarean.
And we learned about home birth.
And we realized
that, for us, that
was going to be
the only way I was
going to be able to
have a natural delivery.
When I went into
labor, the midwives
were there straight away.
I was able to use a birth
pool, which was amazing.
I did some relaxation in between
my contractions in the birth
pool and was probably
the most relaxed
I've ever been in
my life in that time
and in such a good
space mentally
to be able to, I guess, make
it through a labor which did
become a little bit difficult.
My cervix did the same thing as
it did with my first delivery.
And I had this little
anterior lip that got stuck.
And I didn't have an
epidural this time.
So I could feel the
baby moving down.
And I knew that my uterus was
doing the right thing by moving
my baby down my pelvis.
And I could feel
it there was room.
But this lip just
got in the way.
And so we did a lot of things
to try and get it moving.
I walked up lots of sets of.
Stairs and eventually
Helen was able to push
that part of the cervix back.
And I was able to deliver
my baby naturally,
which felt as though I'd
been waiting for four years
to do since my first
experience with the Cesarean.
It felt really great and
very empowering, obviously.
My body was doing what
I knew it could do.
So that was a pretty
important moment for me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The idea that because we live
in Australia and we have access
to a hospital system, we have
access to Cesarean surgery
and the whole gamut of
machines that go ping,
that therefore it's safe is
probably the biggest furphy.
>> Women are not told
usually that interventions
in childbirth can affect
psychological outcomes,
can affect the interaction
between the mother
and the baby.
And that is a big omission.
It's treated usually as if
this is peripheral and rather
flimsy information and that
we're sort of new age hippies
if we're interested
in it at all.
>> Australia is doing very
well with regard to safety.
We're right up in the
top rankings of safety.
And so in terms of
really serious problems,
they're very low.
For a baby dying in childbirth,
it's less than 1 in 100.
And most of those are related
to actual congenital defects
and abnormalities.
For the risk of mother
dying in childbirth,
it's of the order of 10 in
100,000, so incredibly low.
>> We don't lose many
babies in Australia.
We're very lucky, because
we've got good nutrition
and good social circumstances.
But what we do lose
a lot of marriages
and a lot of relationships and
a lot of people's mental health
after childbirth.
>> We have a very limited view
about safety in maternity care.
Essentially, it's live
baby and live mother.
Now, of course,
those are ultimately
the most important thing.
But they're not the only thing.
And when we focus
so much on what
I call the tip of the
iceberg in this situation,
we actually often ignore
great underlying dangers
that we don't address.
For example, cultural
safety, emotional safety,
psychological, spiritual
safety are not addressed.
We know that postpartum
depression is rising.
We know that suicide
is one of the leading
causes of maternal
death in this country.
That's not safe care.
>> When we see three to five
women per 100 coming out with
such extreme distress,
post-traumatic stress disorder,
something that soldiers
experience after war,
what are we saying?
So birth is a battlefield?
>> We are the only species
of mammal that mistreats
our mothers.
And we expect them to be able
to suck it up and perform
like the perfect
mother after we've
harassed these young moms.
>> A woman is more likely to
develop PTSD if she feels that
all control has
been taken from her,
and she is the passive object of
other people's administration.
She isn't asked for
consent, for example,
for different maneuvers
which they may do.
She's supposed to shut
up and get on with it
and let them do the birth.
And she comes out of
that feeling helpless.
And this helplessness
can persist
in other areas of her life too.
So it's not just the birth.
But she gives up and feels
that it isn't justified
for her to take over
responsibility for anything.
And women can feel this
for many, many years.
I've had women in
their 60s and 70s
ring me to talk about births
which they haven't yet
worked through.
And this experience
has stayed with them
and incapacitated them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> My name is Djapirri
Mumunggurrtiji.
I am a local Yirrkala
woman, a Yolgnu woman.
This is my home.
And I was born and raised here.
Birthing in the country.
is the most sacred,
the most powerful thing
that can happen to a woman.
And it is sacred.
It is holy.
It is not to be
known, only women.
And that's what most
of it is so important.
We are [INAUDIBLE],, [INAUDIBLE],,
we are holy women when we are
giving birth, because
it comes from the unseen
to the mother's womb and then
is born with flesh, blood,
and water.
And women then is
to be respected.
>> Birthing practices still have
a lot of secrecy around them.
They still have a lot of things
that I don't understand even
as a midwife.
And I think it's important to
acknowledge that and support
women in staying connected
to their country,
in staying connected to the
ceremony around birthing
practices, staying connected
to their own midwives who've
practiced midwifery care for
tens of thousands of years.
>> [SPEAKING AUSTRALIAN KRIOL]
>> We love to work together.
There would be this
incredible moment
of bonding between the
registered white midwife
through a formalized
training program
and the traditional midwife,
who's probably caught more
babies than I have or at least
tended more births than I have,
who's got the skill
and the wisdom
of her culture behind her.
And it was such an honor to
be working with these women.
And these traditional
midwives could
speak language who
probably caught
the girl or the young
woman from her mother.
So there's this continuity
of care with a capital C.
>> As I go around the
world working with women
in traditional societies, there
are many ways of dealing with
problems that often we are not
aware of in our own society,
like getting women
and, again, dancing,
using rocking movements of the
pelvis to get the baby rotated
into the correct position
and with the head down,
ready for birth.
I'm fascinated when
I see these things.
And listen to midwives
talking about what
they do when they're faced
with challenges like this.
>> [SPEAKING AUSTRALIAN KRIOL]
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> So you're telling them push.
And then--
>> [SPEAKING AUSTRALIAN KRIOL]
>> OK.
>> Yeah, OK.
It's better, not
so many baby pains.
>> [SPEAKING AUSTRALIAN KRIOL]
>> So you're talking
to the baby too?
>> [SPEAKING AUSTRALIAN KRIOL]
>> They sing the baby up.
They sing the baby
which way to go.
They feel.
And they guard the baby.
And because they know.
They've been through
that channel.
They know every
little turn and twist.
So they tell that baby
it's safe to come.
No, go back that way.
Come this way because
they've already been
on that journey themselves.
>> Anyone here will tell
you that if they have access
to their traditional lands and
they can practice their own
ceremonies and traditions, they
have a strong mental health.
If they have a
strong mental health,
they believe that they have
a strong physical health.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> It's like initiation ceremony
for a child to be born in this
world.
It will keep the baby
healthy from getting sick
or the baby can't drink
milk from the mom.
If the mother's got
problems with her milk,
a mother has to go
through the ceremony.
>> We smoke the baby
because to heal,
heal the baby and heal me.
Kill the games,
otherwise the mother
and the child, the germs--
and they get sick and die.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> I'm glad I participated in
what was happening around me
in my younger days.
You're seeing the smoking
ceremony happening.
People are being
healed through sauna
and basically connecting
yourself to the land
because if we do
that, land offers
the most unspeakable healing
that takes place in the life.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The idea around a community
controlled organization is that
there is an autonomy.
And there is a strong side in
the direction of the health
service.
They don't have the
government bearing down,
looking over the shoulders of
even the nurses at work who
or of the manager.
So we're a very
autonomous organization.
We manage ourselves day to day.
We manage our own budget.
We have to do our reporting.
But the strength is
in the communities
getting what they want rather
than the government deciding
what they should have.
>> My name is
Tanya Marie Kunoth.
I live at a [INAUDIBLE]
community, Utopia,
by Alice Springs,
Northern Territory.
I work as an Aboriginal
assistant teacher
at [INAUDIBLE] high school.
I'm 33.
I have four kids.
Amber was born at Utopia Clinic.
She was born 19 days early.
Had not choice.
Had to been born out here,
because it was raining.
And the roads were closed.
And the airstrip was closed.
At Theo delivered her.
And I had my mom there with me.
I wanted to have
Ambrose out here,
but the doctor said no because
there was a risk that something
could happen.
So I had to go to Alice Springs
and sit for three weeks, which
was really bad and horrible.
Then when Liwana
come along, I got
to have her out here, which
was a good thing because I
had all my family around me.
>> They're all there together.
And all the siblings are around.
They get to see and
feel what's happening.
Mom is having a baby.
Oh, so the sound of
a woman in labor?
Those children know
a woman in labor.
They learn from watching.
They learn to see how it's done.
Now you take that
woman out of context.
How are those little kids who
learn in their cultural way
by seeing--
they see, and then they do.
You take that woman
into the hospital,
those kids aren't
going to learn.
They're not going to learn
by seeing because they're not
going to get to see.
All they see is a woman flying
out, leaving her family,
feeling distressed because
she's leaving your country
and going to a foreign place.
And then she comes
back with this baby.
Maybe this baby came
out of her tummy.
Maybe she's got bad stories
about how she felt really
fearful and horrible about it.
What are we teaching
that next generation?
>> It's very important for
Aboriginal people to be born
on the country.
And if they're not, well,
they become Australia.
So that it's a human cost
rather than a monetary cost.
>> We have special places on
country where this will be
placed.
We've lost every one of them.
I had 11 children.
I never touched any one
of mine after birth.
>> We remove women very
easily and without care from
their homelands and their
culture and put them
into a system that is completely
unfamiliar and barren to them.
It doesn't nurtured
them in any way.
There's no spiritual
value there for them
in a hospital in the city.
>> The policy-makers
promised 10, 15,
20 years ago to return
birth on country.
Well, I say return birth on
country for indigenous women.
And return birth on country
for non-indigenous women.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Kate Gorman.
I'm a director and a writer
and an actor and a dancer.
I'm a storyteller.
I am a wife and a mother.
And family is really
important to me.
Now, I thought--
and I know this is
going to sound so
naive and stupid now.
But this is absolutely true.
I honestly thought that
having private health cover
meant that it would give me
more choices of having a baby.
I honestly believed
that because in my mind
if you pay for something,
then you're allowed
to choose what you want, right?
>> Even though we're in
this era that consumers are
so well-informed, I don't
believe that's how we're seeing
practice.
Consumers are constantly lied
to, are being dumbed down,
treated in a very
paternalistic way,
and essentially get
what the practitioner
is comfortable with.
>> All the mothers I've
talked to since I've been
in Australia, the three
times that I've been here,
complain bitterly that they
were so disillusioned when they
found out that their private
OB gave them less choice than
a midwife or a public OB
even would have given them.
It can be very disillusioning.
I think women in
Australia should really
understand, having a private
OB does not mean you get
private, uniquely yours care.
It means you'll get treated in
an even more standardized way.
>> When you do get
pregnant, most women--
maybe that's a generalization.
But I think most women want
a whole lot of knowledge
because it's unknown.
When you haven't
done it before, you
want to know what it's like.
You want to know
what it feels like.
I went and I did a course with
a woman called Lena Clerk.
And it was fantastic.
It was fantastic because
there were probably
only about 10 mothers.
But that could equate to like
25, 30 people in this room.
And there were people
having home births.
I never heard a home birth.
There were people
in birth centers.
There were people who were
having an obstetrician
at a home birth.
There were people who
just had midwife-led care.
And there were
people in hospitals,
both public and private,
all doing these classes.
And I learned then at
class that there were
lots of ways to have a baby.
So then I went back to
my obstetrician armed
with all this information.
And something happened for
the next two appointments.
And we didn't get
to talk about it.
And then anyway, at
36 weeks pregnant,
I finally have my birth plan
meeting with my obstetrician.
And my husband's not
there for that visit.
I'm on my own.
And I'm excited.
I'm excited about giving birth.
I'm excited about
finally talking
about what I want with the woman
who's going to deliver my baby.
And I said, so in early labor
we'd like to labor at home.
Then we'll come in at the
right time when we come in.
And I said I didn't
want any pain relief.
And she laughed at me.
And she laughed at me in this
really condescending kind
of, [SNEERING LAUGHTER]
yeah, right kind of way.
And so I started to get alarm
bells going off a little bit.
>> Women are getting strong
messages about that they
don't really have to do
their labors anymore.
They could find people who would
rather do elective Caesars.
Or they certainly don't have
to feel their labor anymore.
We don't value that
process of women
working with their bodies,
to birth their babies.
So the labor bypass era,
it's across the board
in the acculturation and
the messages that women get.
Women who are still what I
would call willing women who
want to have a go, they,
whether they really
understand it or not, are
actually counter-culture women
now.
>> So if you've got
people saying to you,
here are your options for birth.
You can have an epidural.
You can have a general.
You can have a Caesar.
You can have a this.
You can have a that.
But no, you can't just go
home and give birth naturally.
Then you're going
to feel inadequate.
I can't take the pain.
Of course you can.
Of course you can take the pain.
If you can handle it
when your leg's broken,
or if you can handle
it when you've
got a terrible
toothache, can't you
handle it when you've
got a pain that's
going, whoa, going, whoa, going,
terrible, terrible, terrible,
baby?
It's a reward.
There's a reward.
>> And then I'd learned all
these great things about
positions.
And it made so much
sense to me for someone
who's trained as a dancer and
knows their body very well
and what their body can do,
about squatting and opening up
your pelvis to let
gravity help the baby.
And she said, all my ladies
give birth on their back.
And I'm thinking you
don't want to get
your Armani trousers dirty by
squatting on the floor with me.
That's what I was thinking
of her at that point.
And then I had done a lot
of reading about third stage
and about the blood transfer
that happens from the placenta
to the baby and
also the hormones,
like taking away the
baby's adrenaline
and giving it the
oxytocin and it
getting the same happy
hormones as the mother.
And to me and to Matthew,
that seemed really important.
>> We are in an
absolutely new situation.
For the first time in
the history of mankind,
the number of women who
give birth to the baby
and to the placenta,
thanks to release
of a cocktail of love
hormones, this number
is approaching zero.
>> Oxytocin that keeps labor
going well and is the hormone
of love and curiosity
and calmness and caring
and the endorphins that
our bodies also produce is
an opiate.
It's the very best one.
It's the one with no unpleasant
or dangerous side effects.
>> When a woman has a drip
of synthetic oxytocin,
often associated with other
drugs like epidural anaesthesia
and so on, it means that this
synthetic oxytocin blocks
the release of the natural
hormones without having
the same behavioral effect.
>> So let our bodies, just a
wonderful chemical producer
of stuff that doesn't give
any pharmaceutical company
profits--
sorry.
But let us have that knowledge
that our bodies are sacred.
>> So I did not want
to cut the cord.
And I wanted a natural
third stage delivery.
And she just said to me--
I get so angry
thinking about it.
She said to me, oh, no.
We have to get that
placenta out straightaway.
I always cut the cord and
then take the thing out,
because my job's not done till
I can inspect the placenta.
Her job's not done till she
can inspect the placenta.
So she can't wait around
40 minutes for me?
So it made me very upset.
>> How often have we all
seen obstetricians sort
of fidgeting, wanting this
baby out, that sort of thing?
That's not really quite
what it's all about.
Midwives, on the other hand,
are there for the duration.
They have nothing else to do.
That is their focus, boing, you
are going to have your baby.
And I'm going to be with
you until you've delivered.
And if it's in 10
minutes, whoopee.
If it's in three hours
and 47 minutes, so be it.
And that's the
sort of attendant,
it seems to me,
that somebody needs
in childbirth, and
absolutely not somebody who's
got other things to do.
Now, it may be that
out there, there
is a massive cohort
of obstetricians
who are prepared to
take exactly that view.
But I have to say,
haven't met them yet.
>> I just said, I don't
think this is going to work.
I think I have to go.
And the one thing I'll
give her credit for
is she recognized it wasn't
going to work as well.
And she didn't try
to talk me around.
She just went, yeah, I don't
think is going to work.
Mind you, she didn't
recommend anybody else.
So I walked out of there
at 36 weeks pregnant.
I had nowhere to have my baby.
>> The important thing is
that a woman births her baby
in an environment
that is good for her.
So she needs to feel supported.
She needs to feel safe, warm,
protected, comfortable, free
to move around.
She needs to feel at one
with the environment.
Now, for some women, the
very idea of home birth
would set them into a panic.
They associate
hospital with being
in a very safe place
where everything
is there to sort things out.
And that's fine
because that probably
will be the best
environment for them.
But as we know, a lot of
people don't like hospitals.
They associate it with illness.
And they don't like
the smell even.
They don't like
anything about it.
And it starts to
sense that's not
going to be a great place
for them to labor and birth.
>> To me, having a room full
of medical professionals
at my birth, I see
that as empowering.
I see myself as being lucky
and fortunate to have that.
I don't see it as
a bad thing at all.
In fact, I see it
is a great thing.
>> For me, the thought
of actually having a baby
in hospital makes me
feel physically ill.
Even visiting friends
of mine in hospital
after they've had their babies,
just the rules and the routine
and everything, even that
will set my teeth on edge.
Whereas being at home, you're
just free to be who you are.
>> Walking into the Hawthorne
birth center and meeting
Barbara the midwife and Bruce,
it was just like I didn't have
to worry about that anymore.
So I could just be in the space
I needed to be to have Olivia.
I went into labor
in the late evening.
I'd gone to bed.
And I woke up with labor pains.
And my sister had
stayed the night.
And Matt was there.
And we rang the midwife.
And she said, I'll go to the
birth center and put Paul on.
And she did that.
I actually got in
the bath at home,
because water was
very important to me.
I knew I wanted water around me.
I labored at home
not for very long.
And I'd gone into established
labor quite quickly.
We got in the car.
That was the worst bit.
It's really shitty
getting in a car when
you're in labor because
you go out of your home
into traffic and noise and dark.
And you can't get comfortable.
And that was yucky.
So then when I got
to the birth center,
I just wanted to get in
the water straight away.
I labored in the water.
And when this involuntary
muscle contraction happened,
something went off in my hand.
And I went, aha, OK, I get it.
Then I went into second stage.
And when I got the pushing
urge, I was like, oh, right,
that bearing down.
And so the only way
that I can describe--
and this isn't a medical
description, you understand.
This is a Kate
Gorman description.
Is your uterus is doing this
and pushing down and pushing in.
And you can use
your stomach muscles
to do that as well
in the same time.
And once I got that it
was like I had something.
I knew what to do.
And I was like, oh, I'm fine.
I remember feeling the head.
And it actually was coming out.
And just, oh, my god.
My baby's coming.
Oh, I'm so excited.
It was just beautiful.
And I was doing it.
Then when Olivia was born in
the water, Matt caught her.
He was sitting behind me.
And he passed her
up through my legs.
And I brought her up
through the water.
And Barbara gave
me a face washer.
And she said, Kate,
just wipe her face.
I wiped her face.
I went, [BLOWS SOFTLY].
And she went, [GASPS HAPPILY].
[CHUCKLES]
And it was like
giving life again.
I'd just given birth.
And then I made her breathe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So there is something about
the template about birthing
and taking it on and going
through that rite of passage,
having the support around that
helps you to move through that
that sets a pattern in the
mother at least and I think
for the partners to feel
like with the right support,
I can take on anything.
And with the right support, my
own strength will come forward.
And this is a fabulous place
to be starting our parenting
journey from.
>> In my second pregnancy,
circumstances had us living
in England.
We were on a farm.
But there was a small
village near us.
And it had a clinic,
a doctors' clinic.
And attached to that was
a midwifery department.
I was walking into NHS
expecting a bit of a fight.
And I knew what I wanted
was a water birth at home.
They didn't blink an eyelid.
It happens all the time.
In my little tiny area,
they do one a month.
>> It felt so good to be
in a maternity system where
my choices were supported.
And I was surrounded
by midwives who
knew that home birth was safe.
I just find it so
frustrating that Australia
doesn't think like that.
>> It's interesting for me to
travel to so many countries
of the world and to see how
many countries are imitating US
maternity care policy
when it's not a good idea.
And you can like blue jeans.
You can like jazz.
But don't like our
maternity care policies,
because they're not
leading you in a good way.
>> The maternity care system
in New Zealand, in my opinion,
is the best in the world.
I used to think the
Netherlands was the best.
And now I would
rate it number two.
But New Zealand I
would rate number one.
Why?
Because first of all,
100% of New Zealand births
are attended by midwives.
Second of all, a mother
has her full choice
to pick a lead maternity carer.
They call it LMC.
And that can be a midwife.
It can be an obstetrician.
Or it can be a GP.
Well, when the midwives
set this up in the 1990s,
obstetricians went
along with it,
because they thought the lead
maternity carer would be them.
Ironically enough, 80%
of New Zealand women
pick a midwife to be their
lead maternity carer.
Now, New Zealand
midwives are all
about normal
physiological birth.
It's the model that
they're taught.
And all their skills
in school, what
they learn in
midwifery training is
how to facilitate normal
physiological birth.
>> If you look at the reforms
around birth in New Zealand--
and we were all in much the
same position 20 years ago.
0.3% of women gave birth
at home at that time.
And we're still there.
But in New Zealand, they
had a visionary woman
who was the health
minister who later
became the prime minister.
Her whole cabinet, every
woman in that parliament
crossed the floor
to vote that women
should have the choice of where
to give birth and with whom.
And it was as simple as that.
>> If a woman goes to a
midwife in British Columbia,
she is cared for by the midwife.
But the midwife
bills the government.
So the provincial medical
health care system actually
compensates, pays the midwife
for the care that she provides.
So having a home birth as
part of the health care system
is actually a safety factor
as well as a social factor.
>> I think women who choose
to have a home birth deserve
government support, just
as I received some sort
of taxpayer-funded support to
have the choice that I had,
which was to go to a private
hospital and have a Cesarean.
I think it's just as important.
It's just as valid.
And wouldn't it be
radical if the government
supported all women to have
the births that they choose?
And why aren't we
lobbying for that?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Croatian.
And I'm a mother.
And I'm a wife.
And I'm a milliner.
And I'm blessed.
I have good friends.
I have a strong family.
I have a beautiful son
and a beautiful husband.
And most of all, I would
describe myself as lucky.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I hadn't thought about
it in any great detail
before I got pregnant.
But I just knew
that I didn't want
to give birth in a hospital.
It didn't seem
like the right kind
of caring, loving,
supportive environment
that I just assumed
you would want
when you were birthing a baby.
>> Being at a hospital
was just strange.
It was like, don't sit
there, you can't sit there
kind of thing.
It was like, you can't sit
on the bed with your partner
kind of thing.
It just felt like that every
time I was at the hospital.
But this being at home, I
could do whatever I want.
And my partner could
do whatever she wanted.
And if she wanted to chuck
stuff around the floor, she can.
>> But I didn't.
>> Yeah.
>> Home birth was the first
place the partners were
in the room, where
women got off the bed,
where alternative methods
of pain relief were used,
where different birthing
positions were used.
So home birth is the reason
that anything good is happening
in our maternity service today.
>> My pregnancy was interesting,
in that I have never felt
so well or so strong or so
capable or so frightened
by what people were telling me.
So we would see Jan.
And I would come out feeling
strong and capable and
independent.
And I can do this.
And it'll be a
positive experience.
And I'll have everyone
who cares around me.
And then I would see my GP.
And I'd come out scared.
I think I was about seven
weeks from Nate's birth.
And he hadn't turned around yet.
So I saw a woman obstetrician.
And as a woman, I've always
gravitated towards female GPs,
thought I would be in
more empathetic hands
with a female obstetrician.
And as it turned out, this
woman was a complete fuckwit.
She told me that seven weeks
out, there was no chance
that Nate would turn.
She told me that unless I
booked myself in for a Cesarean
that Nate and or I would die.
And I said to her I couldn't
believe what she'd said to me.
And I said to her, are
you seriously telling
me that my baby will die?
And she said, babies
don't turn this late.
And I said, well,
I'll try everything.
I'll try acupuncture.
I have a lot of acupuncture.
It works very well for me.
And she told me that
believing in acupuncture
was about as medically
relevant as believing in god.
This woman knew
nothing about me.
I could have been
a devout Christian.
I could have been a devout Jew.
I could have had some
harebrained ideas
about goddesses.
But it doesn't matter.
What she was
basically saying to me
was everything I felt was wrong.
And unless I do it her way,
my baby was going to die.
>> We often blame women.
And we say women
are more fearful.
But I think it's actually time
to look at the health providers
and how we're generating fear.
And the language we use
with women, the environments
that we provide care in can
all generate enormous fear.
I went back to my GP for
something completely unrelated.
And she asked how my
pregnancy was going.
I told her what had
happened at the hospital.
And this woman looked
me in the eye--
this was a woman I trusted.
She'd been my GP
for a few years.
I'd found her really open
and honest and caring.
And she looked me in
the eye and she told me
that an elective Cesarean
was a perfectly pleasant way
to bring a baby into the world.
And I just thought
I was going mad.
I just couldn't believe
that I was surrounded
by so many women who were so
determined that slicing open
my abdomen and
pulling my baby out
was the best thing for me to do.
>> Women who choose home
birth often have a different
philosophical framework to
women who choose hospital birth.
And we've just finished
a study looking
at the choices around vaginal
birth after Cesarean section.
And what became
really clear is women
who chose to have vaginal
birth after Cesarean
came from what we called
a mother birth framework.
Their philosophy was
what's good for me
and makes me healthy and
happy is good for my baby
because I will mother better.
The women who chose
repeat Cesarean often
came from a childbirth
framework, which
was my job as a good mother
is to sacrifice myself
for my baby.
Society very much
sits on the side
of the childbirth
framework and says,
good mothers
sacrifice themselves.
Women who say, strong
mothers, empowered mothers,
powerful mothers and healthy
mothers are good mothers
often shout into this world
that does not understand them.
>> What it made me realize is
that the choices that I've made
about what was good for me and
the baby I was carrying were
right, that my instincts were
right, that my midwife was,
along with Nick, the best people
to be with me during my labor.
We had an appointment with Jan
and had called her that day
in floods of tears.
She talked me down, told me
everything would be fine,
to come tomorrow, and
we'd talk about it.
She checked him.
She checked me.
She said that we were fine
and to just give it a few more
weeks and see how he went.
And he turned.
>> In every country I visit,
when women actively choose home
birth in a developed country,
it is because they are informed
and educated.
And they understand that
home birth will give them
the best chance of a safe,
normal, physiological birth,
home birth with a
skilled assistant,
home birth, especially planned
home birth with a midwife.
>> What the research says
is for normal physiological
childbirth, women are
best supported by known,
experienced
caregivers, one-on-one,
continuously
throughout the labor.
You might think that if we
were interested as a culture
about normal
physiological childbirth,
we might provide
for women in labor.
But in fact, in
our birth culture,
you really have
got to search out
anything that
approximates getting
that in your care situation.
And most women, if
they're on the game
and understand about this, if
they really understand what's
required, they're more
or less have to design
this for themselves
because it's not
on offer apart from in very
small pockets in our birth
culture.
>> So we got to 42 weeks.
We were seeing Jan
a lot at that point.
And it hadn't quite
engaged fully.
And he showed no signs
at all of coming.
We found out that my fluid
levels were really quite low.
They didn't want him
to go into distress.
So we went back that afternoon
and had my waters broken.
And I went into labor.
I was thinking, OK, I might be
in hospital, but Jan's with me.
It's all fine.
And then I got to 5 centimeters.
And they rolled over
and went to sleep.
And I stopped contracting.
A very sympathetic, very
young woman said to me,
I think we need to
give you a Cesarean.
I stalled and
stalled and stalled.
Eventually spoke to Jan.
And she said, I think this is
probably what we need to do.
So then I talked to them about,
if this is what we have to do,
I want to be awake.
I want Nick to be with me.
I want Jan to be with me.
I don't want anyone to tell
me what sex my baby is.
I don't want you
to cut the cord,
if you can possibly help it.
If you do have to cut the cord,
I want you to cut it long.
And I said to them, I'd
like it to be really quiet.
I didn't want Nate arriving in--
[SNIFFLES]
I wanted Nate to come surrounded
by his family in his home,
in his living room.
I wanted it to be peaceful
and calm and welcoming.
And what I didn't want
was him to be wrenched out
of me in an operating
theater with noise and light
and stress.
And in the end, they were
very gentle and quiet.
And there's a picture I have
of him being lifted out.
And he looks like he's asleep.
Although it wasn't the
birth I wanted for him,
and it wasn't the way I
wanted to birth my child, what
made it OK was that every step
of the way, Jan was there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's been an eerie silence
from the feminists on the issue
of childbirth and women's
rights around childbirth.
And I think that stems
from this concern
that if we associate
women with birth,
we pull them back to the home.
We pull them back out of
all of the advancements
that we've made.
And I think that's
a very sad comment
because never before in history
have we've been able to have it
all.
>> A lot of the things that we
fought for when we were saying
we want equality in the
'70s have gone away.
All of a sudden, there's
a prevailing culture
for young women which is
about very high heeled shoes
and overtly sexual behavior
or submissive behavior.
It's about de-powering
young women.
>> To transform
birth in any society,
the first thing is education of
women and the entire populace
in normal physiological birth
and in the notion that birth is
a normal life event.
Young girls and young
boys need to be told that
and believe that and get
that from a very early age
before they can get scared.
>> Core of life is an education
program about being pregnant,
giving birth, and having a baby
and presenting the realities
of that to young people.
>> They need to be able
to draw from a reality
and an evidence-based
perspective.
They need to move away
from some of those beliefs
that they may have
formed from the media
or from even family
that have had not
such an ideal
experience or had a very
ill-informed or
disempowering experience
that is then being passed on.
>> If we're able to educate
young people about these
choices before they're
actually pregnant,
it's going to make a huge
difference to each and every
one of those children
when they're born,
not just because they might
choose to have the baby at home
or because they might choose to
have the baby in a big hospital
but because they
actually choose.
>> I'm a childbirth educator
and a birth attendant,
or more commonly called
a doula these days.
The women who have
this calling, I
call it this yearning, this
sort of archetypal yearning
to want to birth from
their own resources
and to go through
a rite of passage
as well as the physiological
birth of their baby
and to honor the
physiological process
and the hormones
that set up that best
possibility for bonding
with their baby,
they really have got to
have particular education
to match their wants with
what's on offer in the system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> These decisions
that I'm making,
they are about safety and about
the best start for my child
and the best outcome
of birth for me.
>> For the first time
ever that I can remember,
Amnesty International has got
involved in the childbirth
debate.
>> We're fighting an uphill
battle to try and even argue
that birth is a physiological
event that women actually have
some say in where
they want to do it.
>> I'm not satisfied that
women have not been afforded
their real worth.
>> If we have been able during
the 20th century to rediscover
the basic needs of a
newborn baby, why not,
during the 21st
century, rediscovering,
in the same way and in
spite of similar obstacles,
why not rediscovering the
basic needs of women in labor?
>> Yes, I was scared.
And yes, I thought,
oh, my god when's
this going to end at times.
It wasn't all fabulous and mung
beans and incense, not at all.
But I did it.
I did it.
>> If we had the support of the
health care system saying that,
yes, this is a true
option for women,
we're going to support this,
we could take a deep breath,
a bit of a sigh of relief and
get on with doing what midwives
do, and that's being with women.
>> It's very clear to me
evidence is not going to end
this debate because actually the
home birth debate is about more
than safety.
It's about more than
perinatal mortality.
The home birth debate cuts to
the core of many very, very
deep issues in our society.
It's about women's agency
and right to choose.
It's about trust in birth.
It's about belief and
maximization of physiology.
Get down to the bottom
line, and home birth
threatens all of her
deeply held beliefs
around this in childbirth.
>> This isn't a
fringe feminist issue.
This is a human rights issue.
This is an issue for humanity.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The great thing is for
those of us who want to change
childbirth and improve it
that we keep up, keep at it,
and don't give way and
think we've failed.
And speak with a clear voice.
And join with other
women to speak.
[MUSIC PLAYING]